what emerged from the Constitutional
Convention of 1787 was a plan for a
compound Republic that was partly
national and partly federal to
paraphrase Madison an independent
executive had control over national
administrative affairs the states kept
important powers to address tasks that
did not require national direction or
management Madison never regretted his
support for a national rather than
confederal system of government but he
worked over several decades to preserve
what he believed was the right balance
between the national government and the
states on the one hand and the
legislative and executive powers of the
central government on the other he
believed that the concentration of power
in the central government as a whole or
in the executive branch would not be
good for liberty or good government
Madison's last significant action as
president was his veto of the so called
bonus bill that included a wide-ranging
plan for internal improvements such as
roads and canals although he understood
the benefits that would come from these
improvements Madison believed that the
powers contained in the bill were not
among the enumerated powers of Congress
as set out in the Constitution for
Congress to assume these powers on its
own would represent a dangerous
challenge to the constitutional system
the people in their capacity as the
sovereign body had been entrusted with
the power to revise the Constitution
through the addition of amendments
argued Madison where Madison
and most other presidents into the 19th
century
that powers not granted were forbidden
President Theodore Roosevelt took a
different view
Roosevelt asserted that powers not
forbidden were granted and while many of
his predecessors saw themselves as the
servant of Congress Roosevelt saw the
President as the servant of the people
he transformed the legislative role of
the president from simple legislative
advisor to outspoken advocate of
policies that would strengthen America
he said famously I suppose my critics
will call that preaching but I have got
such a bully pulpit his use of
presidency as a bully pulpit contributed
to the greatest expansion of federal
power in the country's history to that
time modern presidents routinely take
the lead in calling for national action
to address all types of problems in this
manner President Lyndon Johnson also
acted as what might be called chief
legislature in the 1960s he submitted 87
bills to Congress and signed all but
three of them into federal law he
championed civil rights and poverty
legislation the monumental Civil Rights
Act and the Economic Opportunity Act
better known as the war on poverty bill
following the assassination of President
Kennedy here and now declares
unconditional war on poverty in America
President Johnson used the phrase Great
Society to describe the various programs
that he believed would empower Americans
to shape the civilization that they
wanted for themselves during Johnson's
time in office and in sharp contrast to
Madison's presidency the national
government enacted the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 and 1965
established the Medicare and Medicaid
programs and passed legislation to
protect wilderness areas and strengthen
education it is significant that all
this action by the national government
triggered no constitutional crisis none
of the programs were declared
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court
but many prominent citizens argue that
programs aimed at poverty education
health or civil rights fall outside the
sphere of proper national authority
Ronald Reagan for example criticized
federal education and civil rights
programs during his 1980 presidential
campaign he worked to reduce federal
spending on social welfare programs and
restrained federal regulatory activity
his statements provoked a national
debate over the case for big government
Reagan is credited with helping to shape
a Supreme Court that would protect the
place of the states in the American
federal system the one area that Reagan
believed did call for large-scale action
by the federal government was defense
defense spending increased by over 100
percent between 1980 and 1987 the
constitutional arrangement that emerged
out of the Convention of 1787 reflects
the framers attempt to match
presidential powers with
responsibilities where the line should
be drawn in the distribution of powers
will continue to be debated